---
id: "819942a5-e61c-43a4-8ca7-98ad3cc36880"
title: "I Will Never Forget"
description: "Reflecting on my life shaped by experiencing the 9/11 attacks as a 4th grader."
pubDate: "Mar 14 2026"
heroImage: "/posts/3-14-2026.webp"
spotifyUrl: "https://open.spotify.com/track/7fvgzmfXxrdTcrL3xh2cBD?si=11a86a23cae54bfd"
---

I was in 4th grade and living in Steuben County, NY when the 9/11 terrorist attacks happened. Even though we could not see the smoke from our windows, we were close enough to experience firsthand the emotional and spiritual trauma caused by that tragic day. But I was only in 4th grade.

I know now I probably crossed paths with many people, probably even some of my 4th grade peers, who were grappling with loss directly caused by the 9/11 attacks. 

The catch phrase “Never Forget” is now part marketing ploy, used to attach emotion to merchandise, t-shirts, magnets, and hats. But for those who genuinely want us to never forget - trust me - I won’t forget. 

But humanity will, one day. That’s the truth.

I still think about the falling man photo - taken by Associated Press photographer Richard Drew. It stirred up quite the controversy at the time, and perhaps still remains a raw and sensitive photo. 

One of the reasons it remains raw is because we see someone who had to decide, “Stay in the burning building, or jump 90+ stories?”. 

Does any one of us want to ever have to answer that question? 

When my girlfriend and I visited the 9/11 Memorial Museum earlier this year in February, she innocently asked me which I would choose. She was living in Korea during the attacks, so while it was front page news, it was distant enough that every day life continued as usual. 

I actually knew my answer, no pondering needed.

I would jump. 

For me, I would jump because I think it’s the last chance to say, “God, I trust You. It seems impossible to me, but right now, I trust You alone.” 

The medical examiner's office listed manner of death as homicide for all deaths associated with the 9/11 attacks.

I want to be clear: I am not saying jump is the correct answer. We trust God when we stay in the fire too. 

But I do want to suggest that… for every photo from that day… of a person’s last moments on Earth… 

May I suggest that they did not choose to die, but chose what they believed was the choice that had the highest chance of life? 
